Add the 1.2.0 Release Note (#48)
keizer619/release-notes: release-notes-1.2.0.md

A stream is iterable. A stream of type `stream<T, C>` has value type `T` and completion type `C`. Calling the next method on the iterator created for an iteration has the same effect as performing the next operation on the stream. The stream does not keep a copy of the sequence of values returned by the next operation. Any subsequent iteration operation on the same stream will not generate further values so the iteration sequence for iterations other than the first will be the empty sequence. 

The stream type provides methods (more precisely functions in the `lang.stream` library) similar to list:
- map
- foreach
- filter
- reduce
- iterator

The `map()` and `filter()` methods return streams and work lazily. Iterable basic types would have a `toStream()` method to convert to a stream; these should handle mutation similarly to iterators; as of now, it supports only for arrays.

```ballerina
Person[] personList = getPersonList();

stream<Person> personStream = personList.toStream();
stream<Person> filteredPersonStream = personStream.filter(function (Person person) returns boolean {
   return person.age > 100 && person.name != "James";

> });

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stream<Person, error> personStream = getPersonStream();
stream<Person, error> filteredPersonStream = personStream.filter(function (Person person) returns boolean {
   return person.age > 100 && person.name != "James";
});
```

A major revamp of our strand scheduler was done in this release to address the spec deviation. 

## Standard Library

### Enhanced HTTP module

#### Cookie support

- Enable the server to read cookies from the request and write cookies to the response (in "Set-Cookie" header).
- Enable configuring the client to enable/disable cookies, enable/disable persistent cookies, and whether to block/unblock third-party cookies.
- Add persistent cookies support and add support to plug custom persistent storages.  

#### Trailer support

Add support to create, read, update, and delete trailing headers in the response message. All existing header functions are changed to accept a finite-typed variable. The default value is set as `leading`, which means by default, those functions apply to leading headers. In order to apply trailer headers, you need to set the position as trailing as shown below.

```ballerina
string trailerHeader = response.getHeader("foo", position = "trailing");
```

> #### Cache support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Other changes
```

> HTTP Caching by default is disabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- HTTP Caching by default is disabled.
```

# Overview of jBallerina 1.2.0

> JBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major release of 2020 and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2020R1 version of the Language Specification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
jBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major release of 2020 and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2020R1 version of the Language Specification.
```

# Highlights

- Redesigned XML, Stream and Query support
- Based on a stable language specification: 2020R1
- Significant reduction in overall compilation time
- Added cookies and trailer support in HTTP
- Revamped Cache module
- Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls
- Added custom serializer/deserializer and Avro support in the Kafka connector 
- Introduced new Database connectors
- Introduced new client connectors (email, Slack, and Azure time-series)
- Support to mock functions when writing tests
- Test and code coverage report

> - New tool to generates Ballerina bindings for Java APIs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- New tool to generate Ballerina bindings for Java APIs
```

## Language

The language implementation is based on the stable language specification version 2020R1. This implementation introduces a new set of features aimed at making integration further easier for the user. In addition to that, the XML and Lock implementations are out of their preview/experimental status.

In addition to new features, this release also includes critical bug fixes and fixes done to align the implementation with the language specification. Some of these changes are backward incompatible. For a complete list of changes done since 1.1.0, see the `Language changes since JBallerina 1.1.0` section.

### New XML design

This release introduces a revamped XML support along with XPath-like query syntax allowing easy and safe manipulation of XML data. 

#### XML navigation expression

XML step expressions allow to query the children of an XML element or children of members of an XML sequence.

```ballerina
xml x = xml `<root>
<person><name><fname>Kamal</fname><lname>Gunae</lname></name></person>
<person><name><fname>Nimal</fname><lname>Jayee</lname></name></person>
<person><name><fname>Sunil</fname><lname>Kumarae</lname></name></person>

> </root>`;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
xml x = xml `<root>
                <person><name><fname>John</fname><lname>Doe</lname></name></person>
                <person><name><fname>Jane</fname><lname>Doe</lname></name></person>
                <person><name><fname>Bob</fname><lname>Bernard</lname></name></person>
            </root>`;
```

// Select all children items of `x`.
xml allChildren = x/*;

// Select all children items, which are XML elements.
xml allElementChildren = x/<*>;

// Match first-level children with element name `person`.
// Then, match the second level with element name `name`
// and the third level with element name `fname`.
xml fnameItems = x/<person>/<name>/<fname>;

// Select all descendants, which match element name `fname`.
xml fnameDescendents = x/**/<fname>;
```

XML filter expression allows filtering an XML sequence by an element name.

```ballerina
xml x = xml `<root>
<rectangle length="5" width="10"/>
<rectangle length="5" width="5"/>
<circle radius="2"/>
<square side="6"/>

> </root>`;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
xml x = xml `<root>
                <rectangle length="5" width="10"/>
                <rectangle length="5" width="5"/>
                <circle radius="2"/>
                <square side="6"/>
            </root>`;
```

```ballerina
Person[] outputPersonList =
       from var person in personList
       let string depName = "WSO2", string replaceName = "Alexander"
       where person.deptAccess == "A" && person.firstName == "Alex"
       select {
              firstName: replaceName,
              lastName: person.lastName,
              deptAccess: depName
       };
```

As of now, query expressions are supported by lists and streams.

#### Query action

The clauses in the query pipeline of a query action are executed in the same way as the clauses in the query pipeline of a query expression. The query action is executed as follows. For each input frame `f` emitted by the query pipeline, execute the block-statement with `f` in the scope.

```ballerina
error? result = from var student in studentList
 	where student.score > 1.0
do {
        FullName fullName = {firstName: student.firstName, lastName: student.lastName};
        nameList[nameList.length()] = fullName;

> }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    error? result = from var student in studentList
                    where student.score > 1.0
                    do {
                        FullName fullName = {
                            firstName: student.firstName, 
                            lastName: student.lastName
                        };
                        nameList.push(fullName);
                    };
```

A stream is iterable. A stream of type `stream<T, C>` has value type `T` and completion type `C`. Calling the next method on the iterator created for an iteration has the same effect as performing the next operation on the stream. The stream does not keep a copy of the sequence of values returned by the next operation. Any subsequent iteration operation on the same stream will not generate further values so the iteration sequence for iterations other than the first will be the empty sequence. 

The stream type provides methods (more precisely functions in the `lang.stream` library) similar to list:
- map
- foreach
- filter
- reduce
- iterator

The `map()` and `filter()` methods return streams and work lazily. Iterable basic types would have a `toStream()` method to convert to a stream; these should handle mutation similarly to iterators; as of now, it supports only for arrays.

```ballerina
Person[] personList = getPersonList();

stream<Person> personStream = personList.toStream();
stream<Person> filteredPersonStream = personStream.filter(function (Person person) returns boolean {
   return person.age > 100 && person.name != "James";
});

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

}
```

#### Variable names as fields of mapping constructors

A mapping constructor expression can also contain just a variable name (`foo`) as a field. This is equivalent to the key-value pair field `foo: foo`. The name of the variable is considered the key while the variable reference is considered the expression.

```ballerina
type Employee record {|
    string name;
    string department;
|};

public function main() {
    string department = "Finance";

    // The variable-name `department` is 
    // used as a field here.
    Employee e = {name: "Jo", department};
}
``` 
### Improvements to metadata

#### Deprecation syntax

You can now mark type definitions, functions, object methods, and constants as deprecated using the `@deprecated` annotation. The compiler will generate warnings if a you use a deprecated construct. If the deprecated construct contains documentation, you need to add some additional bit of documentation called `Deprecated` documentation. The `Deprecated` documentation should ideally include details on why the construct was deprecated and suitable alternate options, which should be used instead.

```ballerina
# Creates and returns a `Baz` object.
#

> # # Deprecated

Reviewer 3: @hasithaa should we remove the Deprecated documentation from this example?

Reviewer 3: and the content?

Reviewer 7: let's keep this. We are going to fix the docgen in the next patch release.

- The semantics of the `lock` statement has been changed. Now, it acquires a single, program-wide, recursive mutex before executing a lock statement and releases the mutex after completing the execution of the lock statement.
- When a list constructor or a mapping constructor is used without a contextually-expected type, now a tuple or a record type is inferred rather than an array or a map type.
- The `x@` syntax  for accessing the attributes of an XML element has been removed.
- Now, member value assignment for a dynamic list adds filler values if the required members are not already filled and the relevant member type has a filler value.
- Functions with the same name were previously allowed in both the module and the module's tests. This is now disallowed and results in a compilation error.
- Now, out of range index access of `xml` sequences result in empty sequences rather than a panic. Using the `xml:get()` langlib method with an out of range index results in a panic.

## Runtime

### Compilation time improvement

> Major improvements to the compilation (code-generation) time are implemented. The compiler backend, which generates the Java bytecode for Ballerina programs is now rewritten to improve the overall compilation time. This change has specifically reduced the total time it takes for Java bytecode generation.

Reviewer 3: All 3 sentences pretty much say the same thing.
```suggestion
The compiler backend, which generates the Java bytecode for Ballerina programs was rewritten to reduce the time taken for Java bytecode generation. This resulted in a significant reduction in overall compilation time.
```

Reviewer 8: +1

### The `@strand` annotation

As per the Ballerina language specification, new strands should belong to the same thread as the currently executing strand. Strands, which belong to the same thread share the following characteristics. 

- Only one strand can run simultaneously.
- The currently-running strand should yield to switch its thread to execute another strand.
- Strands belonging to a particular thread are cooperatively multitasked.
- All the strands created in a particular execution of a Ballerina program will be executed sequentially by a single thread. 

In some situations, it would be desirable to assign strands to different threads. You can change this behavior with an annotation but such an annotation was not available in Ballerina releases prior to 1.2.0. This has been a major spec deviation. 

A major revamp of our strand scheduler was done in this release to address the spec deviation. 

## Standard Library

### Enhanced HTTP module

#### Cookie support

> - Enable the server to read cookies from the request and write cookies to the response (in "Set-Cookie" header).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Cookie support

A new cookie API has been introduced for easily handling HTTP cookies. It provides the following features:
- Enable the server to read cookies from the request and write cookies to the response (in "Set-Cookie" header).
```

:-----:|:-----:|:-----:
JIRA|wso2/jira7|ballerina/jira7
GoogleSpreadSheet|wso2/gsheets4|ballerinax/googleapis.sheets4
Twilio|wso2/twilio|ballerinax/twilio
FTP|wso2/ftp|ballerina/ftp
Redis|wso2/redis|ballerina/redis
JMS|wso2/jms|ballerina/java.jms
MongoDB|wso2/mongodb|ballerina/mongodb
GitHub|wso2/github4|ballerinax/github4
Salesforce|wso2/sfdc46|ballerinax/sfdc46
SOAP|wso2/soap|ballerina/soap
Gmail|wso2/gmail|ballerinax/googleapis.gmail
AmazonSQS|wso2/amazonsqs|ballerinax/aws.sqs
AmazonS3|wso2/amazons3|ballerinax/aws.s3
Java|ballerinax/java|ballerina/java
Java Arrays|ballerinax/java.arrays|ballerina/java.arrays

### Added new connectors

The following connectors are newly added in this release. 
- Slack client connector
- Azure time-series client connector
- Email client connector
- Preview of new database connectors
    - JDBC connector
    - MySQL connector

### Revamped connectors
The following connectors are revamped in this release.
- Google sheets connector
- Salesforce connector

## Deployment

### Docker Annotations

Support for setting an Environment Variable to the Docker image.

```ballerina
@docker:Config {
	env:{
   		testVar1: "value1",

>    	testVar2: "value2"

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
   	   	testVar2: "value2"
```

#### Test report

The `ballerina build` and `ballerina test` commands now generate an HTML report at the end of test execution. This would contain the total test cases executed, passes, failures, and skipped tests with project-level, module-level, and individual test details. The link to the test report can be found at the end of the test execution.

#### Code coverage

Introduced the `--code-coverage` flag for `ballerina build` and `ballerina test` commands. When the flag is provided, an additional section with code coverage details will be displayed in the test report. This would contain coverage details at project-level, module-level, and of individual files. 

>**Note:** This is only supported with project-based execution in v1.2.0.

## IDE Plugins & Language Server

### Go to Definition support for Standard Library content

You can go to [The Standard library](https://ballerina.io/v1-2/learn/api-docs/ballerina/) content such as functions, action invocations, types, etc. by executing the `Go to Definition` action.

### New code actions

- All imports are optimized

> - Abstract functions are implemented

Reviewer 3: Would be good if these two can be elaborated bit. The second one especially since it doesn't really convey anything at all to the average user. Points to be covered:
- What does it do?
- How do I use it?

Author: Please send further comments/suggestions in a PR as this is already merged to adhere to the release deadlines.

### Dynamic configuration updates support

Now, you do not need to restart the IDE make the user configurations effective.

# List of issues fixed for 1.2.0

A complete list of issues fixed for 1.2.0 can be found [here](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%22Ballerina+1.2.0%22+is%3Aclosed).

> 

Reviewer 3: Remove the extra lines

Author: Please send further comments/suggestions in a PR as this is already merged to adhere to the release deadlines.

# Overview of jBallerina 1.2.0

JBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major release of 2020 and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2020R1 version of the Language Specification.

# Highlights

- Redesigned XML, Stream and Query support
- Based on a stable language specification: 2020R1
- Significant reduction in overall compilation time
- Added cookies and trailer support in HTTP
- Revamped Cache module

> - Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and Added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls
```

Author: Fixed.

- Added custom serializer/deserializer and Avro support in the Kafka connector 
- Deprecated previous JDBC connector and introduced new Database connectors which are now in a preview state

> - Introduced new client connectors (email, slack and azure time-series)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Introduced new client connectors (email, Slack and Azure time-series)
```

Author: Fixed.

- Support to mock functions when writing tests
- Test and code coverage report
- Java binding generator tool

> - Ag number of important bug fixes

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Several critical bug fixes
```

<rectangle length="5" width="5"/>
<circle radius="2"/>
<square side="6"/>
</root>`;

xml rectangles = x/*.<rectangle>;
```

#### XML attribute access

 ```ballerina
xmlns "www.ballerina.io/ns" as ns;
xml val = xml `<element type="fixed" ns:count="2></element>`;
string|error 'type = val.'type;
string|error count = val.ns:count;
```

XML attribute access is now lax typed. This means that compile-time type checking is relaxed and moved to runtime. Accessing a non-existent attribute or using field access expression on a non-XML element item will result in an error being returned. If optional field access syntax is used, then nil will be returned instead of an error when the field is not available. Attributes with namespace prefix are accessed using the `value.prefix:attrName` syntax where the XML prefix must be declared in the scope.

```ballerina
xml val = xml `<element type="fixed"></element>`;
string|error nonEx = val.nonExsistent; // result in error
string|error? nonExOptional = val?.nonExsistent; // result in nil
```

### New language-integrated query design

#### Query expression

A query expression provides a language-integrated query feature using SQL-like syntax. 

> In its most basic form, a query expression consists of four kinds of clauses: from, let, where, and select. The first clause must be a from clause and the last clause must be a select. The result of the query expression is a list. In this basic form, a query expression is just a list comprehension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In its most basic form, a query expression consists of four kinds of clauses: `from`, `let`, `where`, and `select`. The first clause must be a `from` clause and the last clause must be a `select` clause. The result of the query expression is a list. In this basic form, a query expression is just a list comprehension.
```

> The from clause works similarly to a foreach statement. It creates an iterator from an iterable value and then binds variables to each value returned by the iterator. The where clause is a boolean expression, which can refer to variables bound by the from clause; when the where expression evaluates to false, the iteration skips following clauses. The let clause binds variables. The select clause is evaluated for each iteration; the result of the query expression is a list whose members are the result of the select clause. 

Reviewer 3: Here also the clauses need to be formatted as code since those are keywords.

Author: @pubudu91 - Can you edit here itself that I can commit directly?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `from` clause works similarly to a foreach statement. It creates an iterator from an iterable value and then binds variables to each value returned by the iterator. The `where` clause is a `boolean` expression, which can refer to variables bound by the `from` clause; when the `where` expression evaluates to `false`, the iteration skips following clauses. The `let` clause binds variables. The `select` clause is evaluated for each iteration; the result of the query expression is a list whose members are the result of the `select` clause. 
```

```ballerina
Person[] outputPersonList =
       from var person in personList
       let string depName = "WSO2", string replaceName = "Alexander"
       where person.deptAccess == "A" && person.firstName == "Alex"
       select {
              firstName: replaceName,
              lastName: person.lastName,
              deptAccess: depName
       };
```

As of now, query expressions are supported by lists and streams.

#### Query action

The clauses in the query pipeline of a query action are executed in the same way as the clauses in the query pipeline of a query expression. The query action is executed as follows. For each input frame `f` emitted by the query pipeline, execute the block-statement with `f` in the scope.

```ballerina
error? result = from var student in studentList
 	where student.score > 1.0

> do {

Reviewer 7: Not formatted correctly.

Author: @hasithaa - Can you edit here itself so that I can commit directly?

A stream supports two primitive operations: a next operation and a close operation. The next operation has the same semantics as the next method on the `Iterator` abstract object type. The close operation informs the stream that there will be no more next operations and thus allows the stream to release resources used by the stream.

A stream is iterable. A stream of type `stream<T, C>` has value type `T` and completion type `C`. Calling the next method on the iterator created for an iteration has the same effect as performing the next operation on the stream. The stream does not keep a copy of the sequence of values returned by the next operation. Any subsequent iteration operation on the same stream will not generate further values so the iteration sequence for iterations other than the first will be the empty sequence. 

The stream type provides methods (more precisely functions in the `lang.stream` library) similar to list:
- map
- foreach
- filter
- reduce
- iterator

> The `map` and `filter` methods return streams and work lazily. Iterable basic types would have a `toStream()` method to convert to a stream; these should handle mutation similarly to iterators; as of now, it supports only for arrays.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `map()` and `filter()` methods return streams and work lazily. Iterable basic types would have a `toStream()` method to convert to a stream; these should handle mutation similarly to iterators; as of now, it supports only for arrays.
```

- Module `ballerina/lang.int`
  - `Unsigned8`
  - `Signed8`
  - `Unsigned16`
  - `Signed16`
  - `Unsigned32`
  - `Signed32`

- Module `ballerina/lang.string`
  - `Char`

- Module `ballerina/lang.xml`
  - `Element`
  - `ProcessingInstruction`
  - `Comment`
  - `Text`

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.'int;
import ballerina/lang.'string;  

public function main() {
    'int:Unsigned8 number = 200;
    'string:Char char = "A";
}
```

#### Redesigned `lang.xml` module

The XML lang module has been revamped to work with the `Element`, `Comment`, `ProcessingInstructions` and `Text` XML built-in types. 

Previously, functions such as `getChildren()` and `getElementName()`, which are specific to an XML element type were allowed to be called on the `xml` type and if they were called on non-element items, it used to result in runtime errors. With `xml` built-in sub type improvements, these functions are statically type checked and only allowed on the built-in sub type `Element`. The same applies to other built-in sub types and functions.

> 

Reviewer 7: @irshadnilam Please add removed XML functions.

Reviewer 10: Added a suggestion above. https://github.com/keizer619/release-notes/pull/48#discussion_r395535722

Author: Fixed as per Irshad's above comment.

- `lang.array` module - New functions added: `lastIndexOf()`, `toStream()`
- `lang.map` module - New functions added: `toArray()`, `removeIfHasKey()`

## Runtime

### Compilation time improvement

Major improvements to the compilation (code-generation) time are implemented. The compiler backend, which generates the Java bytecode for Ballerina programs is now rewritten to improve the overall compilation time. This change has specifically reduced the total time it takes for Java bytecode generation.

### The `@strand` annotation

As per the Ballerina language specification, new strands should belong to the same thread as the currently executing strand. Strands, which belong to the same thread share the following characteristics. 

- Only one strand can run simultaneously.
- The currently-running strand should yield to switch its thread to execute another strand.
- Strands belonging to a particular thread are cooperatively multitasked.
- All the strands created in a particular execution of a Ballerina program will be executed sequentially by a single thread. 

> In some situations, it would be desirable to assign strands to different threads. You can change this behaviour with an annotation but such an annotation was not available in Ballerina releases prior to 1.2.0. This has been a major spec deviation. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some situations, it would be desirable to assign strands to different threads. You can change this behavior with an annotation but such an annotation was not available in Ballerina releases prior to 1.2.0. This has been a major spec deviation. 
```

A major revamp of our strand scheduler was done in this release to address the spec deviation. 

## Standard Library

### Enhanced HTTP module

#### Cookie support

> - Enable the server to read cookies from the request and write cookies to the response (in "Set-Cookie" header).

Reviewer 3: This needs to be a complete sentence

Reviewer 3: Same problem in the two sentences below as well

Author: This is already a complete sentence. @pubudu91 - Can you edit your suggestion here itself?

Reviewer 3: A sentence was wrong word for it. I meant, As a whole, in this context it's not really correct. It breaks off from the format in which the other content are written. Will see if I can come up with something

- Enable configuring the client to enable/disable cookies, enable/disable persistent cookies, and whether to block/unblock third-party cookies.
- Add persistent cookies support and add support to plug custom persistent storages.  

#### Trailer support

Add support to create, read, update, and delete trailing headers in the response message. All existing header functions are changed to accept a finite-typed variable. The default value is set as `leading`, which means by default, those functions apply to leading headers. In order to apply trailer headers, you need to set the position as trailing as shown below.

```ballerina
string trailerHeader = response.getHeader("foo", position = "trailing");
```
#### Cache support

> HTTP Caching by default is disabled.

Reviewer 3: Not sure this is the correct place list this. This is a change from the current behaviour. Not a feature addition/improvement

Author: @daneshk - WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Yes, This is a change in current behavior. having a new section doesn't make sense. Shall we rename `Cache support` to `Other changes` and list it this under that

Reviewer 2: #### Other changes
- HTTP Caching by default is disabled.

Author: @daneshk - Can you add the changes here itself so I can commit directly?

Author: @daneshk - Can you add your change as a direct comment that I can commit?

Reviewer 2: done

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a subheading under the HTTP module called "Changes in behavior" and mention that in previous versions HTTP caching was enabled by default, but in 1.2.0, it's disabled by default

Author: @pubudu91 - Please send further changes or suggestions in another PR as this is already merged.

### Organization name changes of connectors

**Connector/Module**|**Old Org**|**New Org**
:-----:|:-----:|:-----:
JIRA|wso2/jira7|ballerina/jira7
GoogleSpreadSheet|wso2/gsheets4|ballerinax/googleapis.sheets4
Twilio|wso2/twilio|ballerinax/twilio
FTP|wso2/ftp|ballerina/ftp
Redis|wso2/redis|ballerina/redis
JMS|wso2/jms|ballerina/java.jms
MongoDB|wso2/mongodb|ballerina/mongodb
GitHub|wso2/github4|ballerinax/github4
Salesforce|wso2/sfdc46|ballerinax/sfdc46
SOAP|wso2/soap|ballerina/soap
Gmail|wso2/gmail|ballerinax/googleapis.gmail
AmazonSQS|wso2/amazonsqs|ballerinax/aws.sqs
AmazonS3|wso2/amazons3|ballerinax/aws.s3
Java|ballerinax/java|ballerina/java
Java Arrays|ballerinax/java.arrays|ballerina/java.arrays

### Added new connectors

The following connectors are newly added in this release. 
- Slack client connector
- Azure time-series client connector
- Email client connector
- Preview of new database connectors
    - JDBC connector
    - MySQL connector

### Revamped connectors
The following connectors are revamped in this release.
- Google sheets connector
- Salesforce connector

## Deployment

> ### Docker

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### Docker Annotations
```

Support for setting an Environment Variable to the Docker image.

```ballerina
@docker:Config {
	env:{
   		testVar1: "value1",
   	testVar2: "value2"
	}
}
```
The default base image for the generated Docker images have changed to `ballerina/jre8:v1`. Also, now, Docker images can be generated for `main()` functions.

```ballerina
@docker:Config {}
public function main() {
	io:println("Hello, World!");
}
```

Ability to generate Docker images by only adding the import as `import ballerina/docker as _`. This will generate the Docker images with minimum configurations for services, listeners, and main functions.

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/docker as _;

listener http:Listener helloWorldEP = new(9090);

@http:ServiceConfig {
  	basePath: "/helloWorld"
}
service helloWorld on helloWorldEP {
	resource function sayHello (http:Caller outboundEP, http:Request request) {
		…
    	}
}
``` 

> ### Kubernetes

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### Kubernetes Annotations
```

1. Support for setting a port for Kubernetes NodePort Service types is provided.

```ballerina
@kubernetes:Service {
	nodePort: 31100,
	serviceType: "NodePort"
}
```

2. Support for mounting the `ballerina.conf` file as a Kubernetes Secret is provided.

```ballerina
@kubernetes:Secret {
	conf: "./conf/ballerina.conf"
}
```

3. Support for enabling Rolling Updates for Kubernetes Deployments is provided.

```ballerina
@kubernetes:Deployment {
	updateStrategy: {
    		strategyType: kubernetes:STRATEGY_ROLLING_UPDATE,
    		maxUnavailable: 3,
    		maxSurge: "45%"
	}
}
```

4. Ability to generate Kubernetes artifacts by only adding the import as `import ballerina/docker as _` is provided. This will generate the Kubernetes artifacts with minimum configurations for services, listeners, and main functions.

```ballerina
import ballerina/http;
import ballerina/kubernetes as _;

listener http:Listener helloWorldEP = new(9090);

@http:ServiceConfig {
  	basePath: "/helloWorld"
}
service helloWorld on helloWorldEP {
	resource function sayHello (http:Caller outboundEP, http:Request request) {
		...
	}
}
```

> ### Knative

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### Knative Annotations
```

#### Code coverage

Introduced the `--code-coverage` flag for `ballerina build` and `ballerina test` commands. When the flag is provided, an additional section with code coverage details will be displayed in the test report. This would contain coverage details at project-level, module-level, and of individual files. 

>**Note:** This is only supported with project-based execution in v1.2.0.

## IDE Plugins & Language Server

### Go to Definition support for Standard Library content

You can go to [The Standard library](https://ballerina.io/v1-2/learn/api-docs/ballerina/) content such as functions, action invocations, types, etc. by executing the `Go to Definition` action.

### New code actions

- All imports are optimized
- Abstract functions are implemented

### Dynamic configuration updates support

Now, you do not need to restart the IDE make the user configurations effective.

> # Detailed list of changes from 1.1.0 to 1.2.0

Reviewer 11: Shouldn't this be ```from 1.1.4 to 1.2.0``

Reviewer 7: Also the topic and The Description are different. 
```suggestion
# List of issues fixed for 1.2.0
```

# Overview of jBallerina 1.2.0

JBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major Q1 release of 2020 and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library and developer tooling. It is based on Stable Language Spec version 2020R1.

# Highlights

- Redesigned XML, Stream and Query support
- Based on a stable language specification: 2020R1
- Improved Compilation time.
- Includes a number of important bug fixes
- Added cookies and trailer support in HTTP.
- Revamped Cache module.
- Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and Added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls.
- Added custom serializer/deserializer and Avro support in the Kafka connector. 
- Deprecated previous JDBC connector and introduced new Database connectors which are now in a preview state.
- Introduced new client connectors (email, slack and azure time-series).

> - Changed organization names of all supported connectors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: @daneshk - What do we have to add instead of this?

Reviewer 2: We need to delete this entry. We decided to remove this point in gdoc

Author: Fixed.

- map
- foreach
- filter
- reduce
- iterator

The `map` and `filter` methods return streams and work lazily. Iterable basic types would have a `toStream()` method to convert to a stream; these should handle mutation similarly to iterators; as of now, it supports only for arrays.

```ballerina
Person[] personList = getPersonList();

stream<Person> personStream = personList.toStream();
stream<Person> filteredPersonStream = personStream.filter(function (Person person) returns boolean {
   return person.age > 100 && person.name != "James";
});

```

### Expression-bodied functions

This release introduces expression-bodied functions whose body is a single expression. The expression function body takes the form `=> E;`, where `E` is any expression. It is equivalent to the block function body, `{ return E; }`. The following is an example where a `Person` record is mapped to an `Employee` record using an expression-bodied function.

```ballerina
function toEmployee(Person p, string pos) returns Employee => {
    name: p.fname + " " + p.lname,
    designation: pos
};
```

### Let expressions

> A `let` expression allows you to bind variables and evaluate an expression with those variables in the scope.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
This release introduces let expression. It takes the form `T B = E1 in E2`, where E1 is evaluated resulting in a value v. The typed binding pattern T B is matched to v, causing assignments to the variables occurring in B. Then E2 is evaluated with those variables in scope; the resulting value is the result of the let expression.
```

Reviewer 10: @KavinduZoysa @pubudu91 anything else we should add?

Reviewer 3: No this is good. Can you format the code-like parts? e.g., `T B`

Reviewer 10: Edited to format code like parts.

  - `Unsigned16`
  - `Signed16`
  - `Unsigned32`
  - `Signed32`

- Module `ballerina/lang.string`
  - `Char`

- Module `ballerina/lang.xml`
  - `Element`
  - `ProcessingInstruction`
  - `Comment`
  - `Text`

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.'int;
import ballerina/lang.'string;  

public function main() {
    'int:Unsigned8 number = 200;
    'string:Char char = "A";
}
```

#### Redesigned `lang.xml` module

The XML lang module has been revamped to work with the `Element`, `Comment`, `ProcessingInstructions` and `Text` XML built-in types. 

Previously, functions such as `getChildren()` and `getElementName()`, which are specific to an XML element type were allowed to be called on the `xml` type and if they were called on non-element items, it used to result in runtime errors. With `xml` built-in sub type improvements, these functions are statically type checked and only allowed on the built-in sub type `Element`. The same applies to other built-in sub types and functions.

```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.'xml as xmllib;

public function main() {
     xmllib:Element element = <xmllib:Element> xml `<elem> hello </elem>`;
     xml children = element.getChildren();
   }
```

> 

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
- The functions `isElement()`, `isProcessingInstruction()`, `isComment()` and `isText()` have been removed. The same can be achieved using type testing as follows. 
```ballerina
import ballerina/lang.'xml;
public function main() {
   xml cmnt = xml `<!-- hello from comment -->`;
   boolean isComment = cmnt is 'xml:Comment;
}

- The functions `appendChildren()` and `removeChildren()` has been removed.
``` 
```

Reviewer 10: @rdhananjaya please review. anything else we should mention?

Reviewer 12: approved

In some situations, it would be desirable to assign strands to different threads. You can change this behaviour with an annotation but such an annotation was not available in Ballerina releases prior to 1.2.0. This has been a major spec deviation. 

A major revamp of our strand scheduler was done in this release to address the spec deviation. 

## Standard Library

### Enhanced HTTP module

#### Cookie support

- Enable the server to read cookies from the request and write cookies to the response (in "Set-Cookie" header).
- Enable configuring the client to enable/disable cookies, enable/disable persistent cookies, and whether to block/unblock third-party cookies.
- Add persistent cookies support and add support to plug custom persistent storages.  

#### Trailer support

Add support to create, read, update, and delete trailing headers in the response message. All existing header functions are changed to accept a finite-typed variable. The default value is set as `leading`, which means by default, those functions apply to leading headers. In order to apply trailer headers, you need to set the position as trailing as shown below.

```ballerina

> 		string trailerHeader = response.getHeader("foo", position = "trailing");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
string trailerHeader = response.getHeader("foo", position = "trailing");
```

# Overview of jBallerina 1.2.0

> JBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major Q1 release of 2020 and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library and developer tooling. It is based on Stable Language Spec version 2020R1.

Reviewer 3: Saying "first major Q1 release" is redundant since we are doing one per quarter anyway. Need to rephrase this in a better way

Reviewer 3: Also, I think it's sufficient to say "It is based on the language specification version 2020R1"

Author: How about saying "JBallerina 1.2.0 is the first major release of 2020 and it includes ..."?

Reviewer 3: @hasithaa

Reviewer 7: Looks good to me.

Author: Fixed.

# Highlights

- Redesigned XML, Stream and Query support
- Based on a stable language specification: 2020R1

> - Improved Compilation time.

Reviewer 3: There was a comment on the doc to reword this in a better way. Ideally in a more descriptive and informative way.

Author: Changed to "Significant reduction in overall compilation time".

Reviewer 3: @sameerajayasoma @hasithaa @Kishanthan

Reviewer 7: +1

Author: Fixed.

> - Includes a number of important bug fixes

Reviewer 3: Shall we mention bug fixes at the end of this list, after all the features?

Author: Done

- Added cookies and trailer support in HTTP.
- Revamped Cache module.

> - Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and Added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Redesigned oneof field and map field support in gRPC and added client retry support for gRPC blocking unary calls.
```

Author: Fixed.

- Added custom serializer/deserializer and Avro support in the Kafka connector. 

> - Deprecated previous JDBC connector and introduced new Database connectors which are now in a preview state.

Reviewer 3: Can deprecating something be considered a highlight? That too, to be replaced by something in preview state? I think mentioning the introduction of new DB connectors is sufficient for this section

Reviewer 3: @wggihan @hasithaa

Reviewer 13: +1. We can mention the deprecating blow in the stdlib section.

Reviewer 3: @praneesha this needs to be fixed

Author: Changed to "introduced new Database connectors"

> - Introduced new client connectors (email, slack and azure time-series).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Introduced new client connectors (email, Slack and Azure time-series).
```

Author: Fixed.

- Changed organization names of all supported connectors.
- Support to mock functions when writing tests
- Test and code coverage report

> - Java binding generator tool

Reviewer 3: This is a bit misleading right? The tool generates Ballerina bindings for Java APIs. "Java binding generator" gives off a completely opposite meaning

Reviewer 3: @IrushiL

Reviewer 7: Shall we go with "New tool to generates Ballerina bindings for Java APIs."

Author: Fixed

# What's new in JBallerina 1.2.0?

## Language

> The language implementation is based on the stable language specification version 2020R1. This implementation introduces a new set of features aimed at making integration further easier for the user. In addition to that, the XML and Lock implementations are out in their preview/experimental status.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The language implementation is based on the stable language specification version 2020R1. This implementation introduces a new set of features aimed at making integration further easier for the user. In addition to that, the XML and Lock implementations are out of their preview/experimental status.
```

In addition to new features, this release also includes critical bug fixes and fixes done to align the implementation with the language specification. Some of these changes are backward incompatible. For a complete list of changes done since 1.1.0, see the `Language changes since JBallerina 1.1.0` section.

### New XML design

This release introduces a revamped XML support along with XPath-like query syntax allowing easy and safe manipulation of XML data. 

#### XML navigation expression

XML step expressions allow to query the children of an XML element or children of members of an XML sequence.

```ballerina
xml x = xml `<root>
<person><name><fname>Kamal</fname><lname>Gunae</lname></name></person>
<person><name><fname>Nimal</fname><lname>Jayee</lname></name></person>

> <person><name><fname>Sunil</fname><lname>Kumarae</lname></name></person>

Reviewer 3: @hasithaa had a comment on the doc regarding the names used here. @rdhananjaya

Reviewer 3: Also, the formatting seems off isn't it? Of the `xml` I mean

Author: @pubudu - Can you fix the formatting here itself so that I can commit directly?

</root>`;

// Select all children items of `x`.
xml allChildren = x/*;

// Select all children items, which are XML elements.
xml allElementChildren = x/<*>;

// Match first-level children with element name `person`.
// Then, match the second level with element name `name`
// and the third level with element name `fname`.
xml fnameItems = x/<person>/<name>/<fname>;

// Select all descendants, which match element name `fname`.
xml fnameDescendents = x/**/<fname>;
```

XML filter expression allows filtering an XML sequence by an element name.

```ballerina
xml x = xml `<root>
<rectangle length="5" width="10"/>
<rectangle length="5" width="5"/>
<circle radius="2"/>
<square side="6"/>

> </root>`;

Reviewer 3: Same comment as above regarding formatting

Author: @pubudu - Can you fix the formatting here itself so that I can commit directly?

xml rectangles = x/*.<rectangle>;
```

#### XML attribute access

 ```ballerina
xmlns "www.ballerina.io/ns" as ns;
xml val = xml `<element type="fixed" ns:count="2></element>`;
string|error 'type = val.'type;
string|error count = val.ns:count;
```

> XML attribute access is now lax typed. This means that compile-time type checking is relaxed and moved to runtime. Accessing a non-existent attribute or field access expression on a non xml-element item will result in an error being returned. If optional field access syntax is used, then nil will be returned instead of error when the field is not available. Attributes with namespace prefix are accessed using the `value.prefix:attrName` syntax where the XML prefix must be declared in the scope.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
XML attribute access is now lax typed. This means that compile-time type checking is relaxed and moved to runtime. Accessing a non-existent attribute or using field access expression on a non-XML element item will result in an error being returned. If optional field access syntax is used, then nil will be returned instead of an error when the field is not available. Attributes with namespace prefix are accessed using the `value.prefix:attrName` syntax where the XML prefix must be declared in the scope.
```
